Speeches of Professor Xenophon Zolotas

1957
I always wished to address this Assembly in Greek, but realized that it would have been indeed "Greek" to all present in
this room. I found out, however, that I could make my address in Greek which would still be English to everybody. With
your permission, Mr. Chairman, l shall do it now, using with the exception of articles and prepositions, only Greek
words.
Kyrie, I eulogize the archons of the Panethnic Numismatic Thesaurus and the Ecumenical Trapeza for the orthodoxy of
their axioms, methods and policies, although there is an episode of cacophony of the Trapeza with Hellas. With
enthusiasm we dialogue and synagonize at the synods of our didymous organizations in which polymorphous economic
ideas and dogmas are analyzed and synthesized. Our critical problems such as the numismatic plethora generate some
agony and melancholy. This phenomenon is characteristic of our epoch. But, to my thesis, we have the dynamism to
program therapeutic practices as a prophylaxis from chaos and catastrophe. In parallel, a Panethnic unhypocritical
economic synergy and harmonization in a democratic climate is basic. I apologize for my eccentric monologue. I
emphasize my euharistia to you, Kyrie to the eugenic and generous American Ethnos and to the organizers and
protagonists of his Amphictyony and the gastronomic symposia.

1959
Kyrie, it is Zeus' anathema on our epoch for the dynamism of our economies and the heresy of our economic methods and
policies that we should agonize the Scylla of numismatic plethora and the Charybdis of economic anaemia. It is not my
idiosyncrasy to be ironic or sarcastic, but my diagnosis would be that politicians are rather cryptoplethorists. Although
they emphatically stigmatize numismatic plethora, they energize it through their tactics and practices. Our policies have
to be based more on economic and less on political criteria. Our gnomon has to be a metron between political, strategic
and philanthropic scopes. Political magic has always been anti-economic.
In an epoch characterized by monopolies, oligopolies, monopsonies, monopolistic antagonism and polymorphous
inelasticities, our policies have to be more orthological. But this should not be metamorphosed into plethorophobia,
which is endemic among academic economists. Numismatic symmetry should not hyper-antagonize economic acme. A
greater harmonization between the practices of the economic and numismatic archons is basic. Parallel to this, we have
to synchronize and harmonize more and more our economic and numismatic policies panethnically. These scopes are
more practicable now, when the prognostics of the political and economic barometer are halcyonic.
The history of our didymus organizations in this sphere has been didactic and their gnostic practices will always be a
tonic to the polyonymous and idiomorphous ethnical economies. The genesis of the programmed organization will
dynamize these policies. Therefore, I sympathize, although not without criticism on one or two themes, with the apostles
and the hierarchy of our organs in their zeal to program orthodox economic and numismatic policies, although I have
some logomachy with them. I apologize for having tyrannized you with my Hellenic phraseology. In my epilogue, I
emphasize my eulogy to the philoxenous autochthons of this cosmopolitan metropolis and my encomium to you, Kyrie,
and the stenographers.

https://www.bankofgreece.gr/RelatedDocuments/Zolotas%201957.pdf

https://www.bankofgreece.gr/RelatedDocuments/Zolotas%201959.pdf

https://www.mfa.gr/missionsabroad/images/stories/missions/estonia/International%20Day%20of%20the%20Greek%20Language.pdf
